# Project Lambert
## Background
The use of generative AI models across different industries and businesses has become commonplace in the last few years. However, these models lack something crucial: provenance. Provenance is the ability to trace data and facts reliably to a source and verify them. LLMs do not provide provenance or transparency as a feature at all. Instead, they are treated like blackboxes. AI providers do not elaorate on how the models are trained or how they are built, and act like it is mysterious or even surprising when a model reaches a conclusion deemed 'problematic'.
This lack of transparency can be deadly. LLMs are prone to hallucinations. This is somethig that cannot be mitigated no matter how many guardrails you try to add. It is simply a consequence of the mathematics behind how these models operate. And models are more likely to make mistakes handling data that is sparsely represented during training. Under-represented groups of people including women, LGBT and ethnic minorities are therefore more likely to be negatively impacted by these hallucinations.
Every solution to this problem so far has been inadequate - something slapped on after the fact. Prompt and context engineering will never be enough. In fact, this problem may be intractable no matter what kind of model you are using. This has been present in data science since its inception.

However, it may be possible to make these models transparent and auditable. By understanding the mathematics behind how models work, we can build a new framework from the ground up and incorporate provenance at the deepest level. This is what Project Lambert is trying to achieve.
## The Math
This project was initially inspired by the work of mathematician Eric Hehner. Eric Hehner has developed a unique mathematic notatio system that unified arithmetic and logic - a Unified Algeba https://www.cs.utoronto.ca/~hehner/UA.pdf. This idea, that math and logic are really two sides of the same coin, means we can theoretically build an AI from the ground up not based on statistics and probability, but on logic itself. By incorporating logic at the model's deepest layer, we can make it easier to understand on an intuitive and interpretable level how a model reaches a decision or processes data.

We also take inspiration from Tensor Logic, a framework for creative an AI programming language proposed by Pedro Domingos https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.12269. To summarize Domingos paper, every single operation an AI model does can be reduced down to the same equation, Einstein's Sum, also called the tensor equation. This is normally expressed as <insert traditional notation here>

https://claude.ai/public/artifacts/b7d90d74-2625-4334-866e-0cba53b8f689

However there are other ways to represent this equation using different so-called 'semirings'. We decided to use the logical semirings for Disjunction and Conjunction instead. By representing the core equation of the model this way, we can make it semantially and programmatically easier to see exactly how the model's internal logic works. That is the theory anyway. 

## Status
Right now we have assembled and debugged all the core components needed as prescribed by Domingos, grounded in Unified Algebra rather than typical statistics. We find it is a lot cleaner when expressed this way. But there is still a lot of work today. We need to create a full pipeline that traces a full logic path when giving the model a moderately complex task or query. We need to assess the math of different components, see what can be simplified and what needs to be adjusted. 
